---
layout: post
title: Clash of the Voice Assistants
---
![Google's strength is underrated](http://richardbenjaminrush.com/images/clash-of-the-titans.png)

It's easy to find plenty of articles [like this
one](https://www.cnbc.com/2017/10/12/amazon-echo-market-share-tops-google-home.html)
that tout Amazon's lead in the smart-speaker category. They are all
fundamentally missing the point. Smart speakers are simply the newest front in
the battle of the voice assistants. In other words, Google Assistant is what's
important; the Google Home is only relevant insofar as it gets more people
using Assistant. Ditto for Alexa and the Echo. Amazon's continued discounting
of the hardware, alongside its investments in the Alexa Skills Kit and Alexa
Fund, are strong evidence that this is how the products are viewed internally.

Seen through this lense, Google has an enormous advantage over Amazon, and its
name is Android. Currently over half of all Android phones are capable of
running Google Home. That's more than 400M devices running Google Assistant,
vs. around 25M with Alexa. The primary value of a smart speaker over a phone
is that you don't have to reach into pocket to pull it out. The crash of the
Fire Phone is still echoing in the distance; a smart speaker without a mobile
offering is fundamentally crippled. The Google Assistant follows me throughout
my day in a way that Alexa simply can't.

That said, Google has made a few product choices that are allowing Amazon to
gain ground more quickly than should be possible. The choice not to give
Assistant a human name looms large among these. Though it seems like a trivial
thing, this contributes to both poor user experience and comparatively little
earned media exposure for the product.

Branding for voice assistants is particularly important: not only do companies
train their users to interact in a particular way, users must learn this
behavior without any of the visual cues present in other media. What is true
for all user interfaces is doubly true for voice interfaces: the experience
must be so seamless as to feel obvious. Any burr in this process will inevitably
hurt conversion

Giving voice assistants human names is an obvious way to smooth the user
experience. Human beings are wired to talk to other people, and we constantly
personify our technology. Names like Alexa and Siri facilitate this
anthropomorphization and reduce cognitive dissonance. This is also reflected in
the way media outlets cover these technologies. Naming these products allow
journalists to frame them as human stories rather than tech or business pieces.

Not naming Assistant is a natural outcome that likely stems from its origins in
the Voice Search product. Within this limited domain, it seems natural to ask
Google for answers. However, the emergence of "google" as a word in common
usage has handicapped Assistant by rendering it unsuitable as a wake-word.
Consequently, all queries addressed to Assistant must be prefaced with "hey" or
"OK." Though the addition of a single word seems minor, it feels aggressive and
unnatural as a user.

Ultimately Google is going to win the voice assistant battle. Its advantages
are simply too great to overcome. The day of victory will come when Google
figures out how to fully leverage the vast Android app ecosystem on Assistant.
We already see that Assistant is able to trigger functionality within certain
mobile apps. Once this interoperability is made seamless and available to
developers, it will be game over for Alexa. If a developer is choosing between
building an Alexa skill from the ground up or implementing a new intent
standard in their existing Android app, that's no contest at all. Recent [media
buzz](https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2018/04/google-io-2018-preview-what-were-expecting-from-googles-big-show/)
suggests that we may see more on this at Google IO 2018 next week. 

Cross device functionality will prove to be the decisive factor. When
Assistant, triggered via a Google Home, is able to launch an app on your phone,
the end will be nigh. Not only will this bring to bear the might of the entire
Google Play Store, it will give Google a way to monetize voice search on a CPC
basis by associating a voice search result with a mobile page load.
