---
layout: post
title: On Crypto
---

I can't tell you how many times I've heard that "bitcoin is a bubble, but blockchain is interesting" over the last few months. With everybody from Kodak to Long Island Iced Tea cashing in on the hype, it's hard not to be cynical about blockchain as a technology. Resisting that urge, I've spent some time over the past few months thinking about when, if ever, blockchain might make sense. It's true that blockchain has some attractive attributes, including anonymity, immutability, and fault tolerance.  It also has some very real drawbacks: low throughput, wasted energy, and high transaction costs are among the most discussed. My high-level conclusion has been that unless you have a realistic fear of either massive DDOS attacks or censorship, there is little reason to use a public blockchain. As for private blockchains, I'll just say that many businesses would benefit from a thoughtful implementation of public key cryptography, but that the extent to which any firm can benefit from blockchain is more dependent on how poor their existing IT infrastructure is than on the technical merits of blockchain.

On a less technical note, I am intrigued by the emergence of crypto-anarchism as a social movement. In its most extreme form, this theory proclaims that technology&mdash;specifically blockchain, cryptocurrencies, and cryptography&mdash;can free us from the tyranny of corporations, governments, and the Illuminati. The crypto-anarchist is easily identified by his repeated pronouncements that "the code *is* the law" and "information wants to be free."  

This religious fervor for absolutely trustless systems is an exercise in navel gazing. Its most zealous adherents are building systems that are theoretically perfect and practically useless. We exist in the physical world, outside the bounds of the beautifully polished systems that they have created. It's all well and good that I have a token entitling me to a 1/1,000th ownership stake of a Monet, but when the current holder runs off and sells it in Macau I'm going to have to go to Interpol to try and get my cut.<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup> Governments, laws, and civil society are necessary constructs. They will be altered by technology, but they will not be replaced by it.

I don't mean to say that blockchain is useless. On the contrary, I believe that blockchain creates value in two ways:

First, blockchain is driving standardization. This is not an inherent property, nor is it unique to blockchain&mdash;rather, it is a function of the hype that has been generated by it. You will never get a group of CEOs to adopt a common SQL schema based on Merkle trees, but they are more than happy to embrace the blockchain (and the subsequent pop in their share prices).

Second, the emergence of cryptocurrencies has created a massive economic incentive to study cryptography and decentralized systems. Until recently, these have been relatively niche specialties. Over the long run, increased interest and resources devoted to these fields could create substantial value for our society. It is my sincere hope that many of the technical drawbacks associated with blockchain can be overcome.

<b id="f1">1</b> Securitization of physical assets on the blockchain is actually an exciting idea, but it will __never__ be trustless. [↩](#a1)
