---
layout: post
title: Mr. Markowitz, Meet Mr. Kant
---

![Investors are flooding into passive
funds](https://images.thinkadvisor.com/thinkadvisor/article/2018/01/26/morningstarchart3.jpg)

> Act only in accordance with that maxim through which you can at the same time
> will that it become a universal law.\ -Immanuel Kant

> Hold the market portfolio.\ -Harry Markowitz

Over the past decade, investors have moved en-mass into low-fee, passively
managed ETFs. This is an expected outcome of modern portfolio theory as
formulated by Harry Markowitz in 1952 and since expanded upon by Eugene Fama,
Ken French, Benoit Mandlebrot, and others. This theory lays out a formula to
determine the optimal investment portfolio for a given investor given his or her
personal risk preferences. This portfolio is always some combination of the
"risk-free asset" (ie. US Treasury Bonds) and the "market portfolio." According
to MPT, any other porftolio will expose investors to more risk for less return.

The market portfolio we refer to is not just the S&P 500. Rather, it means every
risky asset available for sale: stocks, bonds, commodities, real estate, you
name it. In common usage it is often constrained to mean equity securities,
though this is not strictly correct. Nevertheless, it does imply that the equity
portion of your portfolio should be invested in "the market" rather than any
particular stock (subject to adjustment for individual exposure via our jobs,
geographies, etc.). Passively managed ETFs provide just such exposure.

Modern portfolio theory is tightly coupled to the efficient markets hypothesis,
which proposes that current market prices reflect all available information
about the underlying asset. There is a lively debate about just how efficient
markets actually are, but in the case of US public equities the consensus seems
to be "not perfect, but pretty good." This is driven by the massive investments
made by hedge fund managers, investment bankers, and other active managers.
Herein lies the paradox: in a world where all investors simply hold the market
portfolio, markets are no longer efficient.

Clearly we are a long way from such a world. But as we watch the coffers of
passively managed funds swell, it's worth considering the impact that they have
on equity markets. By their very nature, passive funds are multipliers of
underlying market activity. As active traders drive prices up and down, these
funds follow along accordingly.
